doc/md: troubleshooting migration failures (#1193)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/versioned/troubleshoot.mdx

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="status">

```text
$ atlas --env local migrate status
Migration Status: PENDING
  -- Current Version: 2 (2 statements applied)
  -- Next Version:    2 (1 statements left)
  -- Executed Files:  2 (last one partially)
  -- Pending Files:   2

Last migration attempt had errors:
  -- SQL:   INSERT INTO `user_groups` (`user_id`, `group_id`) VALUES     -- Founders     (2, 1), (3, 1),     -- Seniors     (1, 2), (2, 2), (3, 2),     -- Constraint error (adding masseelch twice to seniors)     (1, 2);
// highlight-next-line-error-message
  -- ERROR: Error 1062: Duplicate entry '1-2' for key 'user_groups.PRIMARY'
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Fixing Migration Failures

In our experience, the most common failures are introduced by one of the following issues:

- **Syntax Error**: One SQL statement contained a syntax error. Since Atlas provides a way to [lint](/versioned/lint) a
migration directory, this case happens due to a misconfiguration, e.g. not executing the linter before applying the
migration or applying against the wrong dialect (like SQLite files against MySQL).

> - **Schema Dependant Change**: One SQL statement was incorrect in schema context, e.g. adding a table that does already
> exist. This case is usually caused by a schema drift, e.g. because someone manually manipulated the database schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Schema Dependent Change**: A SQL statement was incorrect in schema context, e.g. adding a table that already
exists. This may happen, for example, in cases where someone manipulated the database schema manually.
```

> - **Data Dependant Change**: One SQL statement contained a data dependant change. If your migration adds a constraint
> like `NOT NULL` and the column does contain `NULL` values, the migration will throw an error. Though Atlas' linting
> will warn if such a change is detected, this is still a possible scenario that could break migration execution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Data-dependent Change**: A SQL statement contained a data-dependent change. For example, in cases where your migration adds a constraint
like `NOT NULL` and the target column contains `NULL` values, the migration will throw an error. Though Atlas' linting
will warn if such a change is detected, this is still a possible scenario that could break migration execution.
```

> - **Connection Loss**: For a number of reasons the connection to the database could be interrupted, e.g. due to a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Connection Loss**: The connection to the database could be interrupted for a number of reasons, e.g. due to a
```

network failure or database crash.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Handling the different types of failures
```

### Connection Loss Failures

> Just re-try migration execution. Atlas is smart enough to figure out where to proceed execution. For very rare cases,

Reviewer: "smart enough" feels foreign in a document with this level of detail. 
Atlas stores metadata about executed statements and can resume without re-running statements that succeeded, or something like this

where when working without a transaction (or after an implicit commit) a connection loss occurs between an SQL statement

> and the entry in Atlas schema history table, you might need to manually revert the last applied statement because in

Reviewer: > you might need to manually revert the last applied

is this explained/demonstrated anywhere?

those cases Atlas will continue applying one statement early.

### Syntax Errors

Fix the migration file and re-try migration execution. Atlas is smart enough to continue the execution starting with the
statement following the last successfully applied one.

### DDL Semantics

> Creating or editing schema resources can result in migration failure, e.g. if you are trying to create a table that does
> already exist or to modify a table that does not exist. The cause for this is either an incorrect migration file or a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating or editing schema resources can result in migration failure, e.g. if you are trying to create a table that
already exists or to modify a table that does not exist. The cause for this is either an incorrect migration file or a
```

schema drift, e.g. if someone dropped, created or modified a resource.

#### Option 1: Incorrect Migration File

> Solution can be simple: fix the migration file and re-apply the migration. For cases with multiple deployments or no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case the migration script is incorrect, simply fix the migration file and re-apply the migration. Do not forget to update the migration directory checksum afterwards by running:
```shell
atlas migrate hash --force
```

For cases with multiple deployments or no
```

(fast) editorial access to the migration file you have to fix the database state to match whatever the migration file is
expecting. You can either do this by hand or use one of the `atlas schema` commands. See
[Option 2](#option-2-schema-drift) for more information.

Once the migration / database is fixed, you can retry migration execution.

#### Option 2: Schema Drift

In case of a schema drift, we still consider the migration files the source of truth. Editing its contents to match the
managed database will most likely break other deployments or the local dev. The solution is to fix the database schema.

> This can be done manually or with the help of `atlas schema apply` / `atlas schema diff` commands. Both commands know
> how to read a database state from a migration directory and compare it with a state read from a database. The only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be done manually or with the help of `atlas schema apply` / `atlas schema diff` commands. Both commands can
read a database state from a migration directory and compare it with the current state of the target database. The only
```

difference is, that `atlas schema apply` can then automatically apply the changes to the database, while
`atlas schema diff` will print the SQL on screen for you to check run by hand. You can utilize the `atlas schema status`
command to get information about the currently applied migration version.

##### atlas schema diff

<Tabs
defaultValue="dir"
values={[
{label: 'Migration Directory', value: 'dir'},
{label: 'HCL File', value: 'hcl'},
{label: 'Another Database', value: 'db'},
]}>
<TabItem value="dir">

Compare the state of the `from` database (the one with the schema drift), to the desired state given in the migration
directory. Note the query parameter `version` in the connection string to the migration directory, specifying the
version to consider the current state of the schema.

```shell
atlas schema diff \
  --from "driver://user:pass@host:port/db" \

>   --to "file:///path/to/migrations/dir?version=myTargetVersion" \

Reviewer: love this

  --to "file:///path/to/schema_2.hcl" \
  --dev-url "driver://user:pass@host:port/dev_db"
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="db">

Compare the state of the `from` database (the one with the schema drift), to the desired state given by another database
(e.g. a local dev copy of the schema).

```shell
atlas schema diff \
  --from "driver://user:pass@host:port/current" \
  --to "driver://user:pass@host:port/desired"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Once you apply the SQL shown by `atlas migrate diff` onto your database, the schema drift should have vanished, and you
can retry migration applying.

#### atlas schema apply

Instead of only showing the SQL on the screen, you can immediately let Atlas apply it (Atlas will prompt for
confirmation first).

<Tabs
defaultValue="dir"
values={[
{label: 'Migration Directory', value: 'dir'},
{label: 'HCL File', value: 'hcl'},
{label: 'Another Database', value: 'db'},
]}>
<TabItem value="dir">

Migrate the state of the `url` database (the one with the schema drift), to the desired state given in the migration
directory. Note the query parameter `version` in the connection string to the migration directory, specifying the

> version to consider the current state of the schema.

Reviewer: 💯

  --from "driver://user:pass@host:port/current" \
  --to "driver://user:pass@host:port/desired"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

### Data Dependant Failures

If the issue is caused by adding or changing a constraint, it may result in a migration failure if the existing data
is not valid for the new constraint. E.g. changing a column from formerly `int NULL` to `int NOT NULL` on a column that
contains `NULL` values will cause the migration to fail. This can be fixed by "fixing" the data and re-trying the
migration applying.

In any case, we advise to add the executed statements to fix the data to the migration file to not run into this issue
again for other deployments.

## A Word on Transactions

At Ariga, we advise to favor correctness over performance when it comes to database changes. Wrapping migration
execution in a transaction ensures the changes made to the database are rolled back if an error occurs along the way and
even in cases where the connection is lost, the changes are not committed. However, some databases (most notably
MySQL / MariaDB) do not support
[transactional DDL](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Transactional_DDL_in_PostgreSQL:_A_Competitive_Analysis). If

> working with a database with no support for transactional DDL, a rollback will not restore the state previous to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you are working with a database that does not support transactional DDL, a rollback will not restore the state previous to the
```

> migration execution, and you end up with a "broken" database state. But since Atlas stores its own information about

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
migration execution, and you end up with a "broken" database state. However, since Atlas stores its own information about
```

applied statements within the same transaction, it will start execution with the next statement in the migration file
on a following migration attempt.

## Manipulating the Schema Revisions Table

> Atlas stores information about applied migrations in the managed database. Sometimes, you want to tell Atlas that you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atlas stores information about applied migrations in the managed database. Sometimes, you want to tell Atlas that you
```
```suggestion
Atlas stores information about applied migrations in the managed database. Sometimes, you want to notify Atlas that you
```

manually applied or rolled back a migration file. Atlas provides the
[`atlas migrate set`](/cli-reference#atlas-migrate-set) command for such cases.

:::warning

> Please refrain from manually making changes to the Atlas revision table. The behavior of Atlas after such a change is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please refrain from manually making changes to the Atlas revision table. Atlas' behavior after such a change is
```

---
id: troubleshoot
slug: /versioned/troubleshoot
title: Migration Troubleshooting
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

> There are cases, where the migration applying does not go through without an error. This document aims to provide

Reviewer 3: The first sentence doesn't work well for me. cc @hilakashai or @rotemtam

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="status">

```text
$ atlas --env local migrate status
Migration Status: PENDING
  -- Current Version: 2 (2 statements applied)
  -- Next Version:    2 (1 statements left)
  -- Executed Files:  2 (last one partially)
  -- Pending Files:   2

Last migration attempt had errors:
  -- SQL:   INSERT INTO `user_groups` (`user_id`, `group_id`) VALUES     -- Founders     (2, 1), (3, 1),     -- Seniors     (1, 2), (2, 2), (3, 2),     -- Constraint error (adding masseelch twice to seniors)     (1, 2);
// highlight-next-line-error-message
  -- ERROR: Error 1062: Duplicate entry '1-2' for key 'user_groups.PRIMARY'
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Fixing Migration Failures

In our experience, the most common failures are introduced by one of the following issues:

- **Syntax Error**: One SQL statement contained a syntax error. Since Atlas provides a way to [lint](/versioned/lint) a
migration directory, this case happens due to a misconfiguration, e.g. not executing the linter before applying the
migration or applying against the wrong dialect (like SQLite files against MySQL).

> - **DDL Semantics**: One SQL statement was semantically incorrect, e.g. adding a table that does already exist. This

Reviewer 3: The term "Semantics" means something else to me. Like compiler sematic-checks, which is the "meaning of the DDL" in this case, and not its result. I would change it to "Schema Dependant Change".

```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="db">

Compare the state of the `from` database (the one with the schema drift), to the desired state given by another database
(e.g. a local dev copy of the schema).

```shell
atlas schema diff \
  --from "driver://user:pass@host:port/current" \
  --to "driver://user:pass@host:port/desired"
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

Once you apply the SQL shown by `atlas migrate diff` onto your database, the schema drift should have vanished, and you
can retry migration applying.

#### atlas schema apply

Instead of only showing the SQL on the screen, you can immediately let Atlas apply it (Atlas will prompt for
confirmation first).

<Tabs
defaultValue="dir"
values={[
{label: 'Migration Directory', value: 'dir'},
{label: 'HCL File', value: 'hcl'},
{label: 'Another Database', value: 'db'},
]}>
<TabItem value="dir">

Migrate the state of the `url` database (the one with the schema drift), to the desired state given in the migration
directory. Note the query parameter `version` in the connection string to the migration directory, specifying the
version to consider the current state of the schema.

```shell
atlas schema apply \
  --url "driver://user:pass@host:port/db" \

>   --to "file:///path/to/migrations/dir?format=atlas&version=myTargetVersion" \

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  --to "file:///path/to/migrations/dir?version=myTargetVersion" \
```
Mention the query-string parameters above instead, if you like.

Author: Does not make sense since troubleshooting as for now is for out own execution.

even in cases where the connection is lost, the changes are not committed. However, some databases (most notably
MySQL / MariaDB) do not support
[transactional DDL](https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/Transactional_DDL_in_PostgreSQL:_A_Competitive_Analysis). If
working with a database with no support for transactional DDL, a rollback will not restore the state previous to the
migration execution, and you end up with a "broken" database state. But since Atlas stores its own information about
applied statements within the same transaction, it will start execution with the next statement in the migration file
on a following migration attempt.

## Manipulating the Schema Revisions Table

Atlas stores information about applied migrations in the managed database. Sometimes, you want to tell Atlas that you
manually applied or rolled back a migration file. Atlas provides the
[`atlas migrate set`](/cli-reference#atlas-migrate-set) command for such cases.

:::warning

Please refrain from manually making changes to the Atlas revision table. The behavior of Atlas after such a change is
undefined, and it can possibly break your database to a point you cannot recover from.

:::

> ## Automatic Migration Fixing
> 
> Coming soon: `atlas migrate fix` to automatically resolve the most common sources of migration failures.

Reviewer 3: Remove for now. We'll add it when it's done. 
```suggestion
```
